Hello everyone and welcome to the Moneyball Project Walk through in this lecture video I'm going to
be walking through the solution to the Moneyball project in order to follow along.
Make sure you have the batting see as we file as well as the read me 2013 text file.
Hopefully you had a go at it on your own.
Here I'll be explaining all the steps you needed to follow to solve the project.
Let's go ahead and jump to our studio and get started.
OK.
So here we are at our studio.
Let's go ahead and get started.
I've already downloaded the salaries that C S V and betting but c c that we're going to need.
Let's go ahead and start off by reading the batting that see every file and saving it to a variable
batting.
Well go read that c v and pass and batting and then I'll go ahead and check the head of the batting
data frame.
So really that source is going to expand this window when you wouldn't push this to the right so you
get a little more room here.
So we've got some player IDs Stintz team IDs et cetera.
Let's go ahead and use as TR to check the structure so I can actually just do that in the console right
now.
So when you check the structure of batting OK looks like we have quite a few rows.
Almost 100000 observations and 24 variables.
So something to know that the notebook said was if a column name started with a number.
Since you can't actually do that as far as reading out a number because our will get confused thinking
you're asking for an index not a column name.
It goes ahead and puts an X for you there.
So just keep that in mind or we're going to be referring to those columns that type in that X as well
.
So we want to do is go ahead and call ahead of the first five rows at bats which is a B.
Remember you can always reference that read me textfile 2013 in order to get actual definitions of all
the acronyms here.
I'll go ahead and just tell you what they are as we go along here.
So at AB is at that's going to go ahead and check batting dollar sign a b and looks like we get 0 2
0 1 0 0 for a matching with the notebook.
So looks like we're good there.
We can go ahead and call the head of the doubles column.
So betting dollar sign X to B and we get all zeros which makes sense.
OK.
So continuing on we want to continue with the next step which in the note book was described as feature
engineering.
So we add three more statistics that were used in Moneyball and those were the batting average the on
base percentage and the slugging percentage.
I'm going to go ahead and start with just the batting average and just like the notebook said.
All you do is click on the Wikipedia link and search the page for the formula.
This formula is actually in the notebook and it shifts the number of hits H.
Divided by the at bats number a B.
So let's go ahead and create that I work a little bit in the console just to create that will say be
a for batting average and we'll go ahead and call it batting.
It's divided by batting Whoops.
Dollar Sign a B.
All right we can go ahead and check the tail of batting dollar sign.
B A which says for the first five or last five rows excuse me and looks like we're matching up with
solutions.
So that's all you had to do for that.
And that's those steps are actually outlined in the notebooks.
Now you had to do was the same process for two more columns on base percentage and slugging percentage
.
Again you don't really need to worry too much about what these terms actually mean.
You can read the description in the wikipedia links the oil to really do is find the actual formulas
and then just plug them in.
I'll go ahead and just copy and paste formulas from the solution notebooks but all you had to do was
go to the Wikipedia page and find them.
So for example I'll go ahead and bring up the Wikipedia page for on base percentage which is right here
.
If you went ahead and went to this link.
Scroll down a bit had an overview you would have gotten the formula here o b p equals h plus B B plus
HPB etc..
And here it actually tells you what these acronyms stand for.
Again you can always check the read me that text file in case you want to add more information on that
.
So I'm going to go ahead and put this formula into are based on the column names we have so that formula
copying and pasting it from the solution.
So I just don't waste a bunch of time typing here.
Looks like this.
Since we're just calling off batting dollar sign h batting dollar signs B B etc..
Just those column names so you assign a new column O B P and it looks like that the next one we had
to solve was the slugging percentage and this one was a little tricky because you had to actually calculate
singles which wasn't in our data front to begin with.
However we could calculate singles by subtracting doubles triples and home runs from the total hits
which was the age column.
So calculating singles looked like this line.
We took the a new column singles.
In this case I'm calling it x 1 B because we don't want to start a number as far as the column name
and I'm taking my total hits H and subtracting the doubles X to be the triples.
X 3 B and the home runs are and again this formula is provided for you in the notebook for the instructions
.
Once you have that formula you can go ahead and just open up the Wikipedia link in the notebook and
you would have gotten the formula here SLG for slugging percentage.
And then there's a formula of 1 B plus two times to B plus 3 times 3 B etc. divided by total at bats
.
I'm going to go ahead and just copy that formula from the solutions but hopefully you can figure out
how to actually just type this in yourself.
So essentially just writing in the formula with the column names in place.
All right so let's go ahead and check the structure of our batting frame now make sure everything worked
.
So looks like we have 28 variables which is correct so we were able to add those extra columns successfully
Now we want to do is merge salary data with batting data.
We know we don't just want the best players who want the most undervalued players meaning we also need
to know that salary information linked to their statistical information of their performance.
So I'm going to go ahead and load the salaries file into a data frame so I'll say s a l read that C
S V salary is that CAC.
And notice if I go ahead and check the summary of batting and if I take a look at your ID this batting
data is actually super.
All that goes all the way back to 1871 which is kind of crazy.
So we have data all the way from 1871 to 2013.
That's way too much data.
It's not going to be useful to us.
So we're going to go ahead and use subset to just grab data from 1985 onwards in order to do the merging
between the salaries data and the batting data.
So I want to go in and do that now.
Let me go ahead and say batting say subsets pass in batting year Id greater than or equal to 1985.
And there we have it.
So now if I say summary again on my new batting data frame that I just reassigned I scroll up to year
notice.
Now my minimum value is 1985.
Which is exactly what we want because that lines up for salary information.
So let's go ahead and start merging these two data frames together.
I want to merge S-A l data frame and batting data frame to do that.
I use the merge function so I don't know what to say combo as my new data frame so the combination of
the two and I'm going to go ahead and call merge pass in my first data frame with my second data frame
that I want to merge and then we use the by argument to say what we actually want to join these by and
we want to join these by not just a player id.
We want to join them by player id for your ID so I pass any vector of what I want to join by.
When I say player id comma year Id And now if I check the summary of that combo data frame.
Notice I have information here on salary at the end.
So minimum salary looks like a zero maximum salary.
Quite a good chunk of change there.
So let's go ahead and continue on.
Next step we want to do as far as this whole process was analyzing the last players.
So again as mentioned in the assignment notebook Hopefully your read through it.
The Oakland A's lost three key players during the off season and what you want to do is get their stats
to see what we have to replace.
So the players last were the first baseman Jason Giambi the York Yankees took them and we also had another
outfielder and an infielder.
So I'm going to go and do is use the subset function to get a data free and called last players
call subset combo and I'm going to go ahead and use the special in command to avoid a bunch of or statements
I'm going to say.
In this case I'm actually going to go ahead and copy their player ID's so I don't have to type them
all up and there they are.
So it's GNB they mean.
And then this re infielder guy.
So let's go ahead and create that different.
So now if I look at last players Here's my data frame for the information of the players that we lost
and notice it's going to be a player 80 in the multiple years that they were playing.
So they were always on the Oakland A's but we can see here that in 2001 they were on the Oakland A's
notice immediately after that they get traded.
So we have information of the future if you will.
So continuing on that we have all this information where we want to do is just grab information on the
year 2001 because that's the you are concerned about as far as the story is concerned.
So I'm going to go ahead and clear this and say last players and I'm going to take a subsets was Players
year Id equals equals 2001.
You could have also played around at the plier library with something like filter if you wanted to to
do the same sort of subsect commands totally up to you on just using the most basic commands where you
are how to download any extra libraries.
All right.
The next step we wanted to reduce the lost players data frame to the player id the column the hits doubles
triples home runs and then those extra columns that we actually calculated are going to go ahead and
copy this line.
So I don't waste that much time typing it out.
All right.
So all I'm saying is lost players and I'm using index notation with these brackets to just grab these
particular columns.
So we had a bunch of information about these last players.
I'm just concerned with these columns right now.
All right.
So let's go ahead and check the head of last players.
Perfect.
So hopefully after all the steps your data matched up to look like this.
OK.
Moving on now that we have our last players and their data it's time to find replacement players using
our statistical skills with our programming to try to find undervalued players.
However we have three constraints.
We want their total combined salary to not exceed 15 million dollars.
We want the combined number of at bats to be equal to or greater than the last players.
In this case if we add these at bats it's going to be 1469.
And finally the mean oh BP or on base percentage of a replacement players has to be equal to or greater
than the mean on base percentage of the last players.
So we have the combo data Frane as the source of new players.
What we want to do is set that to be the subset for the year equal to 2001 and now using we check out
the structure of combo.
We have 915 observations and nine or 15 players we want to grab the three undervalued ones that can
have these stats for our replacement.
Now how do we actually do that.
There are tons of ways you can actually filter out play out as data plot it etc. to find those replacement
players.
That's really the fun part of this exercise is exploring the best way to find these replacement players
.
So I purposefully won't go too deep into lots of many methods.
This all just show you a very simple method.
Then there's multiple answers to this question.
So it's actually quite easy to fill up 15 million dollars with these two stats.
So I'm going to go ahead and show you a very simple way of solving this problem.
Go ahead.
Just say clear this con..
I'm going to go ahead and just plot some of this data out.
Gwatney is a great way to solve these sort of issues.
So I'll say cheesy plot passenger data in this case it's combo.
And I'm going to go ahead and plot the on base percentage versus the salary information and I'm going
to make a scatterplot of this GM underscore points it let's go ahead and make the size too.
Just so it's easy to see.
All right.
So here is my plot.
But go ahead and click zoom.
I have a nice plot showing salary information versus on base percentage.
A couple of things stand out to me.
I notice that there's kind of these stacked lines at 0 0 BP.
There's a little one to 25 OVP.
And there's also kind of another suspicious one at one BP.
What does that actually mean.
Well remember on base percentage just means the percent of the time they got on base.
So after watching that video on YouTube about baseball in case you weren't familiar with baseball you'll
know that it's probably unlikely that someone 100 percent of the time gets on base.
It's also kind of strange that there's a lot of people on this straight 0.5 mark and it's really strange
that there's a ton of people at 0 percent unless you start thinking logically about this you'll realize
that it actually makes sense for a bunch people to have 0 percent on base because it means they probably
just went back a few times.
Or just one time and didn't get on base.
Or they maybe not have gone back at all yet in our data so we can basically throw out all these people
at zero.
We'll go ahead and set the limit at 0.5.
Thinking about it and it makes sense that there's a few people at 100 percent on base percentage because
it probably just went to bat once more maybe twice and hit on base both times and 0.5 makes sense because
they probably just went twice.
They didn't get on base one time got on base another time.
What's really useful about this plot is the salary information here we can really clearly see that there's
no real reason to be paying someone more than $10 million dollars.
Because remember we're looking for somewhere around.
If we look at this average again point 3:6 on base percentage now we can see we have a lot of points
here.
Options below even I would say the $8 billion mark.
As far as their salaries Let's go ahead and just cut off salaries $8 million then and cut on base percentage
has to be greater than zero.
So I'm going to go in and do that.
I'll say combo subsets combo salary has to be less than $8 million and on base percentage is greater
than zero.
And now we have our new combo Let's go and call structure on it.
Scroll up a bit.
Looks like you got rid about 300 players so we have 600 players now we can keep messing around with
this play around the base at bats excuse me guessing on our at bats.
They should all have probably greater than 4 fiftyish because this is about 5300.
So we want them to all have around the same number of at bats.
Let's go ahead and say 1 4 6 9 divided by 3.
That's around the four eighty nine range.
So let's go ahead.
Go a little below that because we may have some people have a lot more at bats.
We'll go ahead and cut off at bats for 50.
Again there's lots of correct answers to this so you don't have to do it this way or go ahead it's a
combo the one more subset combo a b greater than or equal to 450 in outs go ahead and trick the structure
of a combo scrolling up.
Looks like we have 122 players to choose from.
So you're really narrowed it down with the at bats which is good.
Moving along we can start to actually take a look at these players and maybe just pick something up
let's go ahead and try using that the player library
to quickly arrange what's left of combo.
So it is a combo and let's arrange it by on base percentage.
So notice we actually did on base percentage in wups ascending order.
Are these.
Well we want to do is have it in descending order so let's grab the first top and I'm going to call
head on this.
So let's try that again I'm going to clear the con..
So it was a little messier output scroll this the right.
I'll go ahead and say
head let's grab just some 20 players to mess around with.
Actually it was kind of a lot let's say 10 players or called the ascending order or on base percentage
.
All right.
Actually I just want to grab the columns.
So let's call this options
and grab some columns off of the options.
I'm going to store that data Frank called Options and then off of options.
I just want a few columns off of this.
I want the columns at bats salary.
And then they're on base percentage and they also want their player the player they should probably
come first.
Could have actually done this using filter or the player.
All right.
So looks like we have a couple of options here.
Let's go ahead and make sure their salaries make sense.
We can't choose GRB but it looks like these next bottom three we can actually choose.
And here we got in on base percentage that really beats this on base percentage.
So we got an average of about points for three point forty.
Salary information looks OK this looks like it's going to be around $13 million ish.
Let's say we got to add these together plus this guy's salary.
And this guy's salary.
And if we add this together it looks like we're at the 10 million mark so it looks like I've got my
three players so this player id this player 80 and this period the THEIR at bats looked like it's more
than enough.
They're all above 500.
So that works out and that's how we could find our three replacement players.
OK.
Hopefully you had a lot of fun with that last part of finding the replacement players.
That's where you can really get creative and have a lot of fun with this exercise.
OK.
Thanks everyone and I'll say at the next lecture